# Traunmueller_et_al._2025
Image analyses
Single-plane images were acquired on a Zeiss LSM800 with a 40x objective at 1024 x 1024 pixel resolution and 16-bit depth. For subsequent intensity analyses, we utilized CellProfiler (Carpenter et al., 2006; https://github.com/CellProfiler).
To segment all DAPI-positive cells within the corresponding DAPI channel, we first trained a new segmentation model on our acquired 40x hippocampal images using Cellpose human-in-the-loop training (Stringer et al., 2021; Pachitariu & Stringer, 2022; https://github.com/MouseLand/cellpose). The trained model was then integrated into CellProfiler via the runCellpose macro in a source-built installation of CellProfiler 5.0.0.1b. Model parameters were set as follows: an expected diameter of 0, a cell probability threshold of -2.0, a minimum object size of 6 pixels, and a flow threshold of 0.6.
The identified objects were subsequently expanded by 10 pixels in diameter to account for the Peri-nuclear cytoplasmic region. The value of increase to account for estimated neuronal soma boundary has been previously empirically tested by the lab on virus injected neurons. To reduce background signal, we calculated the lower quartile intensity for each RNAscope channel and subtracted this value from the corresponding images. The corrected images were then used to compute median intensity units within each DAPI-positive mask for every RNAscope channel using Cellprofiler’s MeasureImageIntensity function. The default behavior in CellProfiler is to rescale the image intensity from 0 to 1 by dividing all pixels in the image by the maximum possible intensity value defined by the image metadata. A custom build python script was used for subsequent generation of figures and for statistical analyses.

